(KEP-2436) Task: Controller Manager Leader Migration (#26970)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/controller-manager-leader-migration.md

---
reviewers:
- jpbetz
- cheftako
title: "Controller Manager Leader Migration"

> linkTitle: "Controller Manager Leader Migration"

Reviewer: Possibly “Migrate A Replicated Control Plane To Use The cloud-controller-manager”?

Author: I simplified it a bit to "Migrate Replicated Control Plane To Use Cloud Controller Manager", matching titles of existing pages. What do you think?

content_type: task
---

<!-- overview -->

{{< feature-state state="alpha" for_k8s_version="v1.21" >}}

{{< glossary_definition term_id="cloud-controller-manager" length="all" prepend="The cloud-controller-manager is">}}

## Background

> As part of the cloud provider extraction effort, all cloud specific controllers must be moved out of the `kube-controller-manager`. All existing clusters that run cloud controllers in the `kube-controller-manager` must migrate to instead run the controllers in a cloud provider specific `cloud-controller-manager`.

Reviewer: > cloud provider extraction

Can we link to more details about this, here / later in the page?

Author: Added a link to https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/04/17/the-future-of-cloud-providers-in-kubernetes/

> Kubernetes project is in the process of migrating the cloud specific code from the core Kubernetes tree to external packages and removing them from the `kube-controller-manager`. Once the extraction has been completed, existing users running older versions of Kubernetes need a process to migrate their existing clusters to use the new `cloud-controller-manager` component with minimal risk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As part of the cloud provider extraction effort, all cloud specific controllers must be moved out of the `kube-controller-manager`. All existing clusters that run cloud controllers in the `kube-controller-manager` must migrate to instead run the controllers in a cloud provider specific `cloud-controller-manager`.
```

Leader Migration provides a mechanism in which HA clusters can safely migrate "cloud specific" controllers between the `kube-controller-manager` and the `cloud-controller-manager` via a shared resource lock between the two components.

This guide walks you through the process of upgrading the control plane from `kube-controller-manager` with built-in cloud provider to running both `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager`.

## {{% heading "prerequisites" %}}

> 

Reviewer: AIUI, readers need
- a cluster
- that is already integrated with an in-tree cloud provider

Author: That is a good point. Will update prerequisites section.

> 

Reviewer: BTW it also looks like this guide assumes you're using RBAC authorization.

Author: added to prerequisites

> This guide walks you through the process of upgrading the control plane from `kube-controller-manager` with built-in cloud provider to running both `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager`.

Reviewer 2: Point out that these are the manual steps required to do the migration, but that cluster administration tools and cloud provider specific documentation might offer more details or an automated workflow?

Author: clarified this is the manual process.

The control plane nodes should run `kube-controller-manager` with Leader Election enabled through `--leader-elect=true`, and the cloud privider set with `--cloud-provider` flag.`cloud-controller-manager` should not yet be deployed.

<!-- steps -->

> ### Grant Access to Migration Lease

Reviewer: nit: headings should be sentence case (but _page_ titles are title case).

Author: Thank you. Updating.

> The default permissions of the controller manager allow only accesses to their main lease. In order for the migration to work, accesses to another lease are required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default permissions of the controller manager allow only accesses to their main Lease. In order for the migration to work, accesses to another Lease are required.
```

> The default premissions of controller manager allow only access to their main lease. In order for the migration to work, access to another lease is required.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The default permissions of the controller manager allow only accesses to their main lease. In order for the migration to work, accesses to another lease are required.
```

> We can grant `kube-controller-manager` full access to the leases API by modifying the `system::leader-locking-kube-controller-manager` role. In this guide, we assume the name of the migration lease is `cloud-provider-extraction-migration`.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
You can grant `kube-controller-manager` full access to the leases API by modifying the `system::leader-locking-kube-controller-manager` role. This task guide assumes that the name of the migration lease is `cloud-provider-extraction-migration`.
```
(see [avoid using we](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-using-we))

> We can grant full access of leases API to `kube-controller-manager` by modifying `system::leader-locking-kube-controller-manager` role. In this guide, we assume the name of the migration lease is `cloud-provider-extraction-migration`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can grant `kube-controller-manager` full access to the leases API by modifying the `system::leader-locking-kube-controller-manager` role. In this guide, we assume the name of the migration lease is `cloud-provider-extraction-migration`.
```

> We can grant full access of leases API to `kube-controller-manager` by modifying `system::leader-locking-kube-controller-manager` role. In this guide, we assume the name of the migration lease is `cloud-provider-extraction-migration`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can grant `kube-controller-manager` full access to the leases API by modifying the `system::leader-locking-kube-controller-manager` role. In this guide, we assume the name of the migration lease is `cloud-provider-extraction-migration`.
```

`kubectl patch -n kube-system role 'system::leader-locking-kube-controller-manager' -p '{"rules": [ {"apiGroups":[ "coordination.k8s.io"], "resources": ["leases"], "resourceNames": ["cloud-provider-extraction-migration"], "verbs": ["create", "list", "get", "update"] } ]}' --type=merge`

> Do the same to `system::leader-locking-cloud-controller-manager` role.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Do the same to the `system::leader-locking-cloud-controller-manager` role.
```

`kubectl patch -n kube-system role 'system::leader-locking-cloud-controller-manager' -p '{"rules": [ {"apiGroups":[ "coordination.k8s.io"], "resources": ["leases"], "resourceNames": ["cloud-provider-extraction-migration"], "verbs": ["create", "list", "get", "update"] } ]}' --type=merge`

### Initial Leader Migration Configuration

Leader Migration requires a configuration file representing the state of controller-to-manager assignment. The following example configuration shows the assignment at this moment where `route`, `service`, and `cloud-node-lifecycle` controllers are started within `kube-controller-manager`.

```yaml
kind: LeaderMigrationConfiguration
apiVersion: controllermanager.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
leaderName: cloud-provider-extraction-migration
resourceLock: leases
controllerLeaders:
  - name: route
    component: kube-controller-manager
  - name: service
    component: kube-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-node-lifecycle
    component: kube-controller-manager

```

> On each control plane node, save the content to `/etc/leadermigration.conf`, and update the manifest of `kube-controller-manager` so that the file is mounted inside the container at the same location. Also, update the same manifest to add the following arguments:

Reviewer 2: "mounted inside the container at the same location"

Probably worth showing this in yaml as well-- it saves a bit of time and it minimizes changes of someone misunderstanding the step.

Reviewer 2: Oh, also, not all cluster configurations use the term "manifest". Might be clearer to say call it something like the "Pod declaration for the `kube-controller-manager`"?

Author: Term "manifest" is defined by kubelet, as "Manifests are standard Pod definitions in JSON or YAML format in a specific directory." Ref: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/static-pod/#configuration-files

Because for a control plane node, pods like kube-api-server, kube-controller-manager, etc, are started as static pods by kubelet, I think it is ok to use "manifest" here.

Reviewer: Maybe mention “static pod” to make it clear we're assuming that the control plane components are run that way. The manifests for static pods are, indeed, manifests.

Author: Added to prerequisites.

> - `--feature-gates=ControllerManagerLeaderMigration=true` to enable Leader Migration as an alpha feature

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `--feature-gates=ControllerManagerLeaderMigration=true` to enable Leader Migration which is an alpha feature
```

- `--enable-leader-migration` to enable Leader Migration on the controller manager
- `--leader-migration-config=/etc/leadermigration.conf` to set configuration file

Restart `kube-controller-manager` on each node. At this moment, `kube-controller-manager` has leader migration enabled and is ready for the migration.

### Deploy Cloud Controller Manager

The desired state of controller-to-manager assignment can be represented by a new configuration file, shown as follows. Please note `component` field of each `controllerLeaders` changing from `kube-controller-manager` to `cloud-controller-manager`.

```yaml
kind: LeaderMigrationConfiguration
apiVersion: controllermanager.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
leaderName: cloud-provider-extraction-migration
resourceLock: leases
controllerLeaders:
  - name: route
    component: cloud-controller-manager
  - name: service
    component: cloud-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-node-lifecycle
    component: cloud-controller-manager

```

> When creating new control plane nodes, the content should be deploy to `/etc/leadermigration.conf`. The manifest of `cloud-controller-manager` should be updated to mount the configuration file in the same manner as `kube-controller-manager`. Similarly, add `--feature-gates=ControllerManagerLeaderMigration=true`,`--enable-leader-migration`, and `--leader-migration-config=/etc/leadermigration.conf` to the arguments.

Reviewer 2: Is there a convention to use the ".conf" file type for configuration yaml? I was expecting ".yaml" but I might be wrong.

Author: There is no defined convention. However, we have kubeconfig and credentials save as `.conf`, so I followed them.

Create a new control plane node with the updated `cloud-controller-manager` manifest, and with the `--cloud-provider` flag unset for `kube-controller-manager`. The newly deployed `kube-controller-manager` MUST NOT have Leader Migration enabled because it does not run the migrated controllers with an external cloud provider and thus is not involved in the migration.

Please refer to [Cloud Controller Manager Administration](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller/) for more detail on how to deploy `cloud-controller-manager`.

### Upgrade Control Plane

The control plane now contains nodes of both versions. The old version running `kube-controller-manager` only, and the new one running both `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager`. The migrated controllers, as specified in the configuration, are running under either old `kube-controller-manager` or `cloud-controller-manager` but not both at any time, depending on which controller manager holds the migration lease.

In a rolling manner, create a new control plane node and bring down one of the old until the control plane contains only nodes of the new version.

> ### (Optional) Disable Leader Migration

Reviewer: Let's leave the “optional” out of the fragment identifier:
```suggestion
### (Optional) Disable Leader Migration {#disable-leader-migration}
```

> Now that the control plane has been upgraded to run both `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager`, Leader Migration has finished its job and can be safely disabled to save one lease resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the control plane has been upgraded to run both `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager`, Leader Migration has finished its job and can be safely disabled to save one Lease resource.
```
?

> Now that the control plane has been upgraded to run both `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager`, Leader Migration has finished its job and can be safely disabled to save one lease resource.

Reviewer 2: It might be needed again if a rollback needs to happen. The rollback might be required for some completely unrelated problem. Maybe recommend that cluster administrators wait an additional release before doing this?

Author: I think "an additional release" part heavily depends on the out-of-tree cloud provider. Probably better let the user decide.

Author: Still, I think it would be great to note that a rollback may happen, and Leader Migration can be enabled back any time as the user likes.

---
reviewers:
- jpbetz
- cheftako
title: "Controller Manager Leader Migration"
linkTitle: "Migrate Replicated Control Plane To Use Cloud Controller Manager"
content_type: task
---

<!-- overview -->

{{< feature-state state="alpha" for_k8s_version="v1.21" >}}

{{< glossary_definition term_id="cloud-controller-manager" length="all" prepend="The cloud-controller-manager is">}}

## Background

As part of the [cloud provider extraction effort](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/04/17/the-future-of-cloud-providers-in-kubernetes/), all cloud specific controllers must be moved out of the `kube-controller-manager`. All existing clusters that run cloud controllers in the `kube-controller-manager` must migrate to instead run the controllers in a cloud provider specific `cloud-controller-manager`.

> Leader Migration provides a mechanism in which HA clusters can safely migrate "cloud specific" controllers between the `kube-controller-manager` and the `cloud-controller-manager` via a shared resource lock between the two components.

Author: Add the cases where we do not need Leader Migration to "Background"

<!-- steps -->

### Grant access to Migration Lease

The default permissions of the controller manager allow only accesses to their main Lease. In order for the migration to work, accesses to another Lease are required.

You can grant `kube-controller-manager` full access to the leases API by modifying the `system::leader-locking-kube-controller-manager` role. This task guide assumes that the name of the migration lease is `cloud-provider-extraction-migration`.

`kubectl patch -n kube-system role 'system::leader-locking-kube-controller-manager' -p '{"rules": [ {"apiGroups":[ "coordination.k8s.io"], "resources": ["leases"], "resourceNames": ["cloud-provider-extraction-migration"], "verbs": ["create", "list", "get", "update"] } ]}' --type=merge`

Do the same to the `system::leader-locking-cloud-controller-manager` role.

`kubectl patch -n kube-system role 'system::leader-locking-cloud-controller-manager' -p '{"rules": [ {"apiGroups":[ "coordination.k8s.io"], "resources": ["leases"], "resourceNames": ["cloud-provider-extraction-migration"], "verbs": ["create", "list", "get", "update"] } ]}' --type=merge`

### Initial Leader Migration configuration

> Leader Migration requires a configuration file representing the state of controller-to-manager assignment. The following example configuration shows the assignment at this moment where `route`, `service`, and `cloud-node-lifecycle` controllers are started within `kube-controller-manager`.

Reviewer 4: Worth mentioning this is the default/normal set of controllers to migrate.

Author: Need to add `As of version 1.21` because we may change that in future release

Reviewer: @jiahuif can you explain what you mean? Is this example something we'd need to update for future releases?

Author: This three controllers will eventually be removed from `kube-controller-manager` once legacy cloud providers are removed from k/k. Using legacy cloud providers is deprecated, which is exactly why we need to migrate them to cloud-controller-manager.

Reviewer: If we change the set of legacy controllers that need migrating, I'd expect SIG Cloud Provider to update this example as part of documenting the change. The “version 1.21” bit is built into the documentation (we don't mention on each page that the documentation relates to the docs version you're viewing).

Does that sound right / make sense?

Author: You're right. I think `At this point` should be good enough.

```yaml
kind: LeaderMigrationConfiguration
apiVersion: controllermanager.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
leaderName: cloud-provider-extraction-migration
resourceLock: leases
controllerLeaders:
  - name: route
    component: kube-controller-manager
  - name: service
    component: kube-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-node-lifecycle
    component: kube-controller-manager

```

On each control plane node, save the content to `/etc/leadermigration.conf`, and update the manifest of `kube-controller-manager` so that the file is mounted inside the container at the same location. Also, update the same manifest to add the following arguments:

- `--feature-gates=ControllerManagerLeaderMigration=true` to enable Leader Migration which is an alpha feature
- `--enable-leader-migration` to enable Leader Migration on the controller manager
- `--leader-migration-config=/etc/leadermigration.conf` to set configuration file

> Restart `kube-controller-manager` on each node. At this moment, `kube-controller-manager` has leader migration enabled and is ready for the migration.

Reviewer 4: Ideally this is done as a migration from version N (eg v1.21) to version N + 1 (eg v1.22). This should then be always be the KCM configuration at version N. This is important if you end up needing to rollback from N+1 to N. The migration work both upgrading and downgrading assuming it is configured this way.

Reviewer 4: Worth mentioning the KCM should *NOT* be configured this way at version N+1.

Author: Will need to add "upgrade from N to N + 1" as an assumption to prerequisites and mention that N to N w/ CCM works too.

Author: "KCM should NOT be configured this way at version N+1" was mentioned below.

Author: Any reason why it is a bad idea to migrate from N w/ KCM to N w/ KCM+CCM?

Reviewer 4: Depends on your tooling. It can be easier to track and automate things like upgrade/downgrade if its tied to a release. For example if you migrate at version N then need to downgrade for unrelated reasons, do you end up reverting to KCM only while not using the controller migration lock?

Author: Stated the reason to be "so that configuration can be aligned to releases"

```yaml
kind: LeaderMigrationConfiguration
apiVersion: controllermanager.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
leaderName: cloud-provider-extraction-migration
resourceLock: leases
controllerLeaders:
  - name: route
    component: cloud-controller-manager
  - name: service
    component: cloud-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-node-lifecycle
    component: cloud-controller-manager

```

When creating new control plane nodes, the content should be deploy to `/etc/leadermigration.conf`. The manifest of `cloud-controller-manager` should be updated to mount the configuration file in the same manner as `kube-controller-manager`. Similarly, add `--feature-gates=ControllerManagerLeaderMigration=true`,`--enable-leader-migration`, and `--leader-migration-config=/etc/leadermigration.conf` to the arguments.

Create a new control plane node with the updated `cloud-controller-manager` manifest, and with the `--cloud-provider` flag unset for `kube-controller-manager`. The newly deployed `kube-controller-manager` MUST NOT have Leader Migration enabled because it does not run the migrated controllers with an external cloud provider and thus is not involved in the migration.

> 

Reviewer 4: This would then be the version N+1 configuration.

Author: clarified.

In a rolling manner, create a new control plane node of version N + 1 and bring down one of version N + 1 until the control plane contains only nodes of version N + 1.

### (Optional) Disable Leader Migration {#disable-leader-migration}

Now that the control plane has been upgraded to run both `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager` of version N + 1, Leader Migration has finished its job and can be safely disabled to save one Lease resource. If a rollback must be performed later, you can safely re-enable Leader Migration before the rollback.

In a rolling manager, update manifest of `cloud-controller-manager` to unset both `--enable-leader-migration` and `--leader-migration-config=` flag, also remove the mount of `/etc/leadermigration.conf`, and finally remove `/etc/leadermigration.conf`. If you need to re-enable Leader Migration, you can recreate the configuration file and add its mount and the flags that enable Leader Migration back to `cloud-controller-manager`.

> ## Additional Reading

Reviewer: nit: we have a shortcode for an end-of-page “What's next” heading.
```suggestion
## {{% heading "whatsnext" %}}
```

> [Controller Manager Leader Migration - KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cloud-provider/2436-controller-manager-leader-migration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Read the [Controller Manager Leader Migration](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cloud-provider/2436-controller-manager-leader-migration) enhancement proposal
```
